it's very common to hear a vague lament
that people believe what they want to
believe people only see what they want
to see to hear complaints about wishful
thinking in general and about the extent
to which desire tends to rule over the
rational lives of men even when they
think what they're saying and doing is
eminently rational what they're really
doing is providing justifications for
their own desires for me the philosophy
of Arthur Schopenhauer was really part
and parcel of decade-long examination of
those issues that started in childhood I
definitely had the example of my own
parents and the way my parents thought
the way they pot thought about politics
the way they figured things out and made
excuses for things in their own personal
lives terms now they lived in what they
did I really saw a world around me where
for the most part reason was a tool in
the hands of desire and in large part
people were manipulating themselves
manipulating others and making excuses
for things even when they were engaged
in formal academic philosophy and
definitely when they were discussing
politics or discussing the the choices
they made their values and so on in
their in their personal lives I could
say you know from my childhood onward
part of my interest in both European
philosophy and Buddhist philosophy had
to do with this problem of understanding
the role of desire in our lives
in this video I'm not going to provide
an overview of the philosophy of Arthur
Schopenhauer I'm going to talk about the
ways in which Schopenhauer's philosophy
shaped or influenced or impacted my life
you know thought of an example last
night just before I went to bed one of
my employers one of my bosses guy was
directly my boss I remember he read this
formal academic linguistic theory it was
a paper presented at a linguistics
conference and then he tacked on to it
this elaborate fantasy he was German
himself and he was explaining to me in
apparently
national terms you know in a calm
rational way and he perceives himself as
being completely rational and he
explained to me his theory that a group
of Germans you know 2,000 years ago or
something in ancient times could have
come to Thailand and conquered a small
Kingdom you know taking over smoking and
influenced the development of the Thai
language you on the basis of some
alleged similarities between you know
linguistic similarities between German
and tuyas languages and I laughed at him
because from my perspective it was so
obvious that this was a self-serving
fantasy or self-serving delusion he was
himself a German at one time a German
tourist now a German who lived in
Thailand permanently it was such an
obvious power fantasy like Conan the
Barbarian or something and I said to
allo you know ancient Thailand was a was
a slave society we're not we can't even
be talking about 2,000 years ago by the
way it would probably have to be less
than 500 years ago in order to influence
the Thai language in Thailand not going
to get into why that is historical would
actually have to be pretty recent
history and because at one point there
were no times in Thailand and the time a
group migration and linguistic formation
in Thailand is much more recent than
people want to believe in it anyway
modern Thai is not an ancient language
long story short um but I said to him
even if you had this fantasy on the
basis of reading this academic article
why wouldn't you assume that there were
Germans who were shipwrecked here and
became slaves who were shipwrecked in
Thailand and ended up its laser why
wouldn't you assume some other more
plausible explanation rather than
arriving here as conquerors and forming
a forming a kingdom of their own within
Thailand you know and then leaving no
historical evidence and that is a
ridiculous you know tinfoil hat theory
but this guy was talking to him he's an
intelligent human being and you know
he's in some ways well-read you know
reading an academic paper and to him
it's invisible to him the extent to
which desire is shaping what he sees and
what he doesn't see is shaping his
thoughts is motivating his speculation
his perception of that speculation as
reasonable and so on even though it's a
small example I mean it's not nearly as
salacious as the type of delusion you
get into with you know personal romance
or what-have-you
you know when desire is really shaping
how people think and feel and behave in
a very sharp and obvious way you know my
whole life I mostly grew up around
left-wing people people on the far left
wing for the most part somewhere between
you know socialist and communist you
know a lot of the people I grew up
around and the way they thought about
politics in history whether recent
politics or politics now from a hundred
years ago 1917 the way they would see
some things and not see others
self-selected blindness that was a big
deal to me as a young man like even 12
years old I was really bothered by that
willing ignorance voluntary ignorance
and the people they didn't see
themselves as being voluntarily it is
being willingly ignorant you know those
were really issues that haunted my youth
so when I encountered you know
philosopher Schopenhauer
I was not interested in the metaphysical
side of what he did I mean it's very
true to say that Schopenhauer's concept
of the will the will with a capital W if
you like is not the same as desire I
mean if you're teaching a course you
know the university students or
something you can't mix up
Schopenhauer's concept of the will and
show Banaras concept of desire you can
see that very clearly for example in
Chopin hours work the will in nature or
Schopenhauer's influence on Charles
Darwin and on early Darwinist thought
and so including social Darwinism but in
general you know philosophy of nature
evolution etc I mean the concept of
evolution itself was really new and
contested during Schopenhauer's life and
he was influential for better and for
worse than that you know I realized my
interest in Schopenhauer is not at all
Schopenhauer's own interest in why he
wrote those books and why he project
propounded that philosophy but you know
in the same way I do think that any
serious reading of Buddhist philosophy
tera vaada Buddhist flaws
is going to lead you to Crest question
the roots of desire and in what way our
perception of the world is different
with and without desire put it like that
you know we have these sayings that we
throw around so casually that beauty is
in the eye of the beholder right but you
know I had gay friends growing up gay
and bisexual friends it's so easy to
just say beauty's men the older and it's
really hard to profoundly reflect on the
way in which your gay friend may
perceive the world differently and feel
differently about the world and politics
because of the rule of desire in his
life or her life whatever we're talking
about you know um you know it's it's
easy to say to talk about you know
wishful thinking but the role wishful
thinking has in terms of your own
friends your own colleagues your own
frenemy using your own enemy and why
they believe the things they do why
they're protesting the things they're
protesting politically or something why
they approach the world where they do
why they set certain priorities you know
are they even aware themselves that they
made a choice when they got outraged
over the war in Yugoslavia
it's an old reference or you know
Israel's occupation of Palestine
if type of white people living in Canada
there's I mean all-out range is
self-selected outrage but normally when
you talk to these people the role of
desire the passions are so overwhelming
they don't think of themselves as making
rational choices or irrational choices
as choosing to put a priority on this
issue instead of that issue I met people
who would care passionately about one
political issue but totally ignore you
know the status of First Nations native
people can at the Creator within Mohawks
and so on and I wouldn't just jump down
their throats about that I wouldn't just
you know insult them for that we all
have to make those choices but it was
very troubling to me that the people
involved
old did not perceive those as choices
now look in some ways the philosophy of
Arthur Schopenhauer if you take it too
seriously is utter madness if you read
for example what Schopenhauer did with
the theory of colors I think that's very
instructive
Schopenhauer was one of the last people
on earth to refuse to accept Newtonian
color theory like you refuse to accept
that it's an objective fact that you can
take white light and put it through a
prism like a rock crystal and then the
white light will split into you know the
color spectrum as we say now in which
the red green blue and violet so in a
sense in a manner of speaking white
light contains the other colors
Schopenhauer was furious at this and
reacted against it and that's a really
instructive example of the way in which
Schopenhauer
doesn't separate the subjective from the
objective world he is really talking
about the psychology of color the
psychology of the perception of color
and not the objective reality of what
happens when you take light and put it
through a prism that's obvious to me
that's probably obvious to 99% of modern
people today you can say well look show
up an hour you're making this
interesting point about how we perceive
color how we think about color but just
can't possibly have the racine kind of
reality of the laws of physics the
discussion of Newton's theory of color
and then the way light actually operates
in a laboratory this is ridiculous in
the same way and in parallel to that you
know what Schopenhauer says the will
existing objectively in contrast to the
perception of phenomena or material
reality if you take it seriously it's
complete madness but definitely for me
in terms of the significance of reading
Schopenhauer it was just this long
complex meditation on the role of desire
in life desire and perception desire and
what we think of as objective reality
when most of the time in our personal
lives or our political lives we're not
dealing with objective reality or
instead dealing with that difficult gray
area
where beauty is in the eye of the
beholder ugliness is in the eye of the
beholder you perceive things as
important or you perceive things at all
because of desires and concerns that are
in the eye of the beholder and
definitely I mean at the end of that
process of study in terms of all the
bits and pieces that I that I found
useful in both European velocity and
Buddhist philosophy I was someone who
was very detached about very sharply
aware of the role of my desires in
shaping my own reasoning and so my
employer in Thailand at that example he
reads this academic paper and has this
kind of power to repent
that's why that was so clear to me and
so laughable to me in that split-second
in that moment I didn't have to go away
and think about it or something it was
immediately obvious to me what the
problem with this course of reasoning
was and ultimately the way the shapes
informs my life now is that you know I
in a profound sense
I'm not susceptible to my own wishful
thinking in a profound sense
I don't become trapped in the riddle of
you know railing against ugliness that's
merely in the eye of the beholder or
lusting after forms of beauty that are
in the eye of the beholder and that
beauty can definitely can definitely
include ideals and idealism beautiful
ideas beautiful aspirations you know the
things that motivate political activism
and idealism I'm profoundly detached
about that in a way that I wouldn't be
if I hadn't engaged in that decade or
more of engagement with philosophy both
European philosophy and Buddhist
philosophy including Arthur Schopenhauer